Nowadays, programming languages are all
around us. It's how we keep the systems
and devices we use every day operating
and running smoothly. They allow for us
measly humans to interact and make cool,
fun, or random things just by tapping a
few buttons. In fact, I would guess if
you're watching this video, you probably
know a few programming languages. But
what was the first programming language?
Well, if you look this up on Google,
you're going to find varying reults.
People claim that maybe it's Autocode by
Alick Glennie in the early 1950s, or
maybe it's Fortran, also developed in the
1950s, but in all actuality computer
science, when it relates to programming
started much earlier than this.
Computer science, when it relates to
programming, actually dates way back as
far as 1843 with Ada Lovelace and her
experimentations. I'm not going to bore
you to death with the details of the
1800s computer science concepts, but
there are a few things that she
understood that paved the way and
honestly started the foundation of all
computer programming languages as we know
it, when Ada Lovelace was young she was
incredibly intelligent, so much so that
her mathematical talents led her to a
long and rewarding friendship with
Charles Babbage, the known father of
computers. Now what we really need to
know is that Charles Babbage had a
breakthrough in the 1820s inventing the
difference machine. This was literally
the first successful fully automatic
calculator, and to be honest, that was
its main purpose. But this was out of the
world, unthinkable at the time. Lovelace
seen this and immediately had a
revelation of her own. She realized that
Babbage's machine could do much more than
just calculate. It was a general purpose
machine for whatever you might want to
do. In fact, Lovelace was the first
person to make the leap that numbers
could actually represent other things
digitally. Right then, the idea
of Programming languages was first born.
I actually researched more into this and
beyond just that. She thought about how
to repeat a series of instructions with
machines and came up with looping. She
literally conjured up what loops now are
with four loops and while loops back in
the 1800s.
Now, after Ada Lovelace, there was
actually a huge gap in the timeline. No
one knew at the time how to convert
machine code and what machines created
into actual programming languages. This
was until Alan Turing made a
groundbreaking discovery. Alan Turing,
another prominent figure in the computer
science upbringing, was a famous computer
scientist for his work on cracking Nazi
Germany's Enigma Code. Turning came him
up with the concept that built upon Ada
Lovelace's original ideas, which was that
there very well could be a universal
machine, one that could follow
instructions and was powered by
electricity and could run programs.
Shortly after this we had the onslaught
of actual programming languages appear,
but many wonder what was the first
legitimate programming language? Well, it
turns out the very first programming
language to actually be used was created
between 1942 and 1945 and was named
Plankalkul. I'm not sure how
it's pronounced.
Created by Konrad Zuse, Plankalkul was
the first semi high level programming
language and it was mainly used to store
codes which at the time enabled engineers
to carry out routines or repetitive tasks
way easier than simply doing it
themselves. Little did Konrad know this
was the beginning of the onslaught of
many more programming languages that most
of us know and love today.
However, while Konrad Zuse was
creating Plankalkul, there was another
computer scientist at the University of
London in Kathleen Booth, another
historical woman figure in the computer
science industry. Kathleen created the
first majorly popular programming
language at the time in assembly. This
was first created in 1947 and has been
used. Nonstop, even up to the present
date. This was the first public and
accessible step that was above machine
language and was before the revolution of
some of the most infamous high level
programming languages. Assembly in itself
is a very low level programming language.
Its intentions are to communicate
directly with the computers hardware via
keyword access modifiers just like we
used today. However many
have described Assembly syntax as
rigorous and difficult to learn, but once
you learn it, it shows the true
relationship between the programmer and
the computer itself.
After Assembly was created in 1947, many
of the foundational programming languages
were built. Fortran, Autocode, Algol,
COBOL, BASIC, Pascal, C, and SQL, all of
which dating back before 1975 and
building what we know to be high level
programming languages in some ways. Their
principles were later designed and
modified off of with newer. Programming
languages like Java, Python, Ruby, C++,
PHP, C#, JavaScript, and so many more. At
the end of the day, all of the
languages we use today for whatever
reasons, whether it be game development,
software engineering, cybersecurity, our
hobbies our side jobs our careers,
everything is all thanks to the founding
fathers of computer science. Thank you
Ada Lovelace, Alan Turing, Konrad Zuse
and Kathleen Booth.